It is nice to be here in Markle on this last Sunday of the year.
And I hope that you have had a Merry Christmas and I want to wish you a Happy New Year as well.
I also want to give you a heads up.
I received a gift this week from someone anonymous, a gift that I was not expecting, a gift that I had not received one like this for quite some time.
a sore throat, congestion, runny nose, the whole nine yards.
And I joked actually last Sunday with Dita.
I don't know if she remembers or not.
We were standing there back by the back doors.
And I said, you know, I think on Friday, I'm going to call Tim and tell him that I'm sick.
And I actually ended up sick this week.
So, be careful what you wish for.
Anyways, it seems to be the gift that keeps on giving.
So bear with me this morning.
I've got my water.
I've got cough drops in my pocket.
I've got tissues up here.
It should be an interesting morning.
But I think we're good to go.
Well, all good things must come to an end.
And here we are at the end of 2025.
And I think most of us are probably looking forward to what's in store for 2026.
And likewise, we're also at the end of our series on 1st Corinthians.
September 21st was when we started this series and the high temperature that day was 83 degrees.
And some of you may be wondering, when are we ever going to get out of this series on first Corinthians?
I mean, seriously, we've been in this thing for a long time.
And it's kind of like when you're on that road trip with your kids in the backseat, you know, and they're asking you, like, how much longer till we get there, dad?
How many of you have been in that situation before?
Yeah.
And if you're like me, my typical response is something like, well, about 20 more minutes.
So, for all of you who've been in this long journey and first Corinthians together, and you're asking that question how much longer, well, my answer to you this morning is about 20 more minutes, okay?
So, hang in there, keep your seatbelt fastened, sit back, relax, enjoy the ride as we unpack this final chapter, chapter 16,
in 1 Corinthians this morning.
Now, when we read 1 Corinthians, we usually focus on the big chapters, like chapters 13, which talks about love, you know?
Or we focus on chapter 15, which Tim preached on last Sunday, which talks about the resurrection, this hope that we have over death.
And it seems like chapter 16 is sort of an afterthought.
Paul mentions his travel plans,
Some names that we don't really know, some greetings we don't fully understand, and the whole chapter just feels a little bit disconnected from the rest of the letter.
It's like a chapter of misfit toys, okay?
But as we walk through this chapter together this morning, I think you'll see that there are some really valuable lessons that we can take away, especially as we think about moving forward into 2026.
We've been walking together through first Corinthians for the past few months, and in this letter, Paul is riding to a church that is struggling.
They're struggling with division, they're struggling with pride, they're struggling with confusion, and the pressure of the culture around them.
And from the start, Paul reminds them that the church is not built around one person.
It's not built around Apollo's or Paul or Peter, it is built around
Christ, and he urges them to go back to what unites them in the first place, which is the gospel.
And he even challenges them to lay down their rights for the sake of others.
He also addresses in this letter their misuse of spiritual gifts and reminds them that love is what really defines a Christian.
And then Paul points them to the resurrection and the hope that we have in Christ and this hope of eternal life, which
Tim again preached on last week.
And so now moving into chapter 16, here we get a glimpse of God's heart for the poor.
We get a glimpse of what it means to trust him with our plans and a glimpse of how important love really is.
Chapter 16 is like the gospel with boots on, showing us how to live out our faith in a very practical way.
But before we dive into this chapter, let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Father, thank you so much for the opportunity to learn from your word.
And I pray, Lord, that our ears would be open to hear what you have to say this morning.
And I pray, Lord, despite not feeling the best, Lord, I pray that the words of my mouth and the things in my heart would be pleasing to you.
Let me pray this in Jesus' name.
Amen.
So we begin chapter 16.
in this book with Paul giving us some directions regarding how the Corinthians should organize their collection for the poor.
And then this is the first of three or four instances in Paul's letters where he talks about taking up a collection for these poor saints or these poor believers in Jerusalem.
And just to give you a little bit of background here, if we go back to Galatians chapter two,
We see that Peter, James, and John had kind of given Paul their stamp of approval, so to speak, to go and reach the Gentiles.
He only asked that he remember the poor, and which Paul says that he is very eager to do so, especially these poor believers in Jerusalem.
Now this passage doesn't explain why they were poor.
We know from Acts chapter 11 that there was a famine going on at this time, and maybe that's why they were poor.
We also know that
A lot of Jews were persecuting Jews that chose to follow Jesus, and maybe that's why they were poor.
Whatever the case, what we do know is that there's poor believers in Jerusalem, and Paul is eager to help them out.
And so he gives the Corinthians some instructions on how to do this.
And we'll look now in starting in 1 Corinthians chapter 16, verses one through
Let me grab a quick drink here.
It says, now about the collection for the Lord's people.
Do what I told the Galatian churches to do.
On the first day of every week, each of you should set aside a sum of money and keeping with your income.
Saving it up so that when I come, no collections will have to be made.
Then when I arrive, I will give letters of introduction to the menu approved and send them with your gift to Jerusalem.
If it seems advisable for me to go also, they will accompany me.
So at first glance, these verses seem pretty straightforward, some simple instructions about giving.
But to better understand what's going on here, we need to look and say, see how these first four verses in 1 Corinthians chapter 16 and
Second Corinthians chapters 8 and 9 tie together because both of these are talking about the same collection for the same poor believers in Jerusalem.
So here in 1 Corinthians 16, this passage that we just read, we see that Paul tells the church to set aside money each week so that the gift would be ready to be delivered when Paul arrived.
But what the passage doesn't tell you is that as time passed,
The Corinthians had some bumps along the way, and they failed to fall through on the collection.
And so Paul writes a second letter to the Corinthians, and in chapters eight and nine, he addresses this problem, and he tells them to finish what they started.
So rather than giving them instructions, he really gives them encouragement, and he reminds them of the generosity
of the other churches in the area, and he reached the whole idea of giving and how much Jesus loves us and has given everything for us.
Second Corinthians chapter eight verse nine says it this way, that though he was rich, talking about Jesus here, that though he was rich, yet for your sake, he became poor so that you, through his poverty, might become rich.
So again, first Corinthians 16 teaches us
how to give, which is the passage we're gonna be looking at this morning.
2 Corinthians 8 and 9 teaches us why we are to give, because God has been above and beyond generous to us.
And this brings us up to this week, Christmas.
For a lot of people, Christmas is all about Santa gifts and what's under the tree, right?
But what is the real reason for this season?
I mean, why do we celebrate Christmas?
Why do we give gifts at all?
We give because God gave first.
He gave us the greatest gift of all.
Like Corbin said, his son Jesus Christ.
And that's exactly even why the wise men came looking for Jesus.
Matthew tells us in Matthew chapter two, on coming to the house, they saw the child with his mother Mary and they bowed down and worshiped him.
and they opened their treasures and presented him with gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
And I want you to notice something here, and that is that their giving of frankincense or gold frankincense and myrrh was an expression of their worship.
And that's Paul's message to us as well.
The giving is an act of worship.
It's not a financial decision.
It's not a business transaction.
or a fundraising strategy or a tax write-off.
Proposed generosity is all about worship.
It's something deeply spiritual and it reveals what's in a person's heart.
Matthew 621 says, for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
And I think the reverse is also true.
For where your heart is, there your treasure will be also.
And we see throughout the Bible that God's heart
is for the poor.
But the question is, where is our heart?
Where is our treasure?
We live in a culture where money drives so much of life.
What kind of job can I get that will help me earn the most money?
Or how can I set myself up to be financially secure?
Even our reputation and our identity are often wrapped up around money.
And we have to admit it, we are materialistic.
And yet to most of us, it really doesn't mean a thing.
So what?
Who cares?
Life goes on.
Eat, drink, and be married.
They say that in America, we invent needs.
It's like we didn't know we needed something until we saw it.
As I was looking for gifts on Amazon this past month, I came across several items like the mini handheld chainsaw or the personal soft serve ice cream maker.
And I immediately said my head, I need that.
How many of you?
Did the same thing, yeah.
I even bought one item and had this written on the box.
The one gadget you didn't know you needed.
That phrase says a lot about us.
It reveals how quickly we are drawn to things that we don't even need.
Too often our treasures are focused on our needs, our needs, our desires, rather than on the needs of others.
Our minds are consumed by what's happening in our world.
We're already planning our next vacation for next year, and we're thinking about what's new restaurant we wanna try that we haven't been to yet, and we're considering how we wanna make that upgrade to our house, and we're wondering when is the next iPhone gonna be released?
Now, none of those things are evil in themselves,
That's not the issue.
The issue is, how are we stewarding the things that God has entrusted to us?
Back in 1 Corinthians 16, Paul tells the believers to set aside their gifts on the first day of every week.
In other words, giving is meant to be thoughtful and regular.
It isn't something we do only when we feel moved or when we happen to have something left over.
It's not coming to church and pulling out your wallet and just
you know, thumbing through and dropping a few bills in the offering plate.
But rather, it's supposed to be a spiritual rhythm of our lives.
We're supposed to be people who give first, not last, who see our generosity not as a loss of what we have, but as a way to live like Jesus.
If you think about it, the kingdom of God is really kind of an upside down kingdom.
The world is telling us, take, take, take in the more you take, the more you'll have.
But God is really encouraging us to give, give, give.
And the more we give, the more we will be blessed.
Now maybe not with material possessions, but with his provision nonetheless.
Because ultimately, it's about trusting God with what is already his to begin with.
So that raises an important question here in this passage.
How much were the people actually supposed to give in the first place?
Was it A, $5, B, a widow's mite, C, everything they owned, or D, 10%.
Well, if you look at verse two, it simply says, in keeping with your income.
Sounds kind of vague, doesn't it?
Just in keeping with your income.
There's no mention of tithing here.
The gift is simply meant to reflect what each person has in proportion to how much they have been blessed by God.
2 Corinthians 8, 12 puts it this way, for if the willingness is there, the gift is acceptable according to what one has, not according to what one does not have.
So this gift is to be thoughtful, planned, set aside, and proportional to what each person had.
And what I want you to see is that in these first opening verses of chapter 16, Paul shows us that generosity is not an afterthought, but it is
and act of worship in response to God's grace.
And when we give, we are declaring that our trust isn't in our money or in our security, but in a God who's already given us everything in Christ.
And if we as a church can learn to live this way, if we can learn to give this way, man, we can be such a testimony of God's love to those around us.
And it can transform our hearts into reflecting God's heart
rather than the values that we see in the world around us.
All right, before Paul completely wraps things up here in 1 Corinthians 16, he goes on in verses five through 12 to talk briefly about his travel plans and the people he's gonna be doing ministry with, people like Apollos and Timothy and others.
And I don't wanna spend a lot of time on this section this morning
But I do want us to look at a couple verses, verses six and seven.
It says this, perhaps I will stay with you for a while or even spend the winter so you can help me with my journey wherever I go, for I do not want to see you now and make only passing visit.
I hope to spend some time with you if the Lord permits.
All right, it's Paul's talking about his travel plans and he says things like, perhaps I'll stay with you.
See, Paul makes his plans, but he also leaves room for God to redirect them if needed.
And I can tell you more than once, if you look throughout Paul's letters here, more than once, God in fact did redirect Paul's plans.
They say that to be a missionary, you have to be flexible, which may be true, but it doesn't mean it's easy.
I would say for many of us and myself included, being flexible isn't really convenient.
We like our five-year plans, our calendars, books, months out.
We like clear outcomes.
We like to be in control of our time.
But as my friend Bugu Dogo in Molly says, each day has its own reality.
And there are a lot of days in ministry where things don't always go as plans.
A couple of years ago,
Couple years ago, I was heading back to a village, and I don't know why I'm getting choked up over this.
I was heading back to a village to drop off a pastor, and as we were driving, a lady flagged us down on the side of the road and asked us to stop and pray for her granddaughter, Marie.
Now I'm guessing that doesn't happen to you very often, where you're driving down the road and someone flags you down and asks you to pray for them.
But Marie is a 17-year-old girl who was running, playing,
Acting like every other 17-year-old girl, her age, until one day when her life changed when she had an accident.
She fell from a third story building and she landed on some rebar which pierced her back and left her paralyzed from the waist down.
Just awful.
And so here we are, we get flagged down to pray for this girl.
And I'm thinking to myself, what are we doing?
I don't have a real my calendar today.
She's not part of my agenda.
She's not part of my five-year ministry plan.
These are from my nose, not from my eyes.
But you know, that's sometimes how God works.
And that time spent praying for her led to a continued relationship with her and her family to this day.
Recently, Marie's been blessed to have a new porch that's handicapped friendly.
She has a new bed, a new wheelchair.
Thanks to generous donors, and Stuja has been above and beyond amazing to this little girl, and has even had other American physical therapists come over and speak into a world.
And most importantly, she's hearing about Jesus, and she is already taking some bold steps to accepting his grace.
And that's the thing, loving people
Rarely fits into our calendar in a nice way.
It's oftentimes very messy.
I think being flexible is just love and action.
It's saying to people like Marie, hey, you matter.
You matter more than my schedule.
It's choosing people over plans and choosing to be present in people's lives over our agendas.
Let's bring this now to verses 13 and 14.
I've got to keep moving on.
Otherwise I'll be here in tears all day.
All right.
13 and 14.
Paul says, be on your guard.
Stand firm in the faith.
Be courageous.
Be strong.
Do everything in love.
Five short commands that are very practical, not just for the Corinthians, but for us as well.
First he says, be on your guard.
To be on your guard means to be watchful, to be spiritually alert.
It's the same word that he uses in 1 Peter when he says be alert.
In a sober mind, you're interviewing the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.
Being on your guard is really important, especially in a world that is dulling our senses.
Even today, the prince of this world is looking for someone like you to devour.
Before writing this letter to the Corinthians, Paul had spent a year and a half with them.
He left some serious, and after, sorry, after he left, some serious moral problems began to surface in the church.
Hold on a second.
See, I knew I brought these for a reason.
So Paul, these Corinth and afterwards,
The church is really struggling.
And I don't believe that these things just happened overnight.
Little by little, things like pride and sexual promiscuity and division just kind of crept into the world.
It certainly sounds a lot like our culture today, doesn't it?
I mean, Sujanai, every time we come back, we are kind of shocked by the spiritual decline that we keep seeing in America right now.
And we're just a shock to find out how many people that we once considered brothers and sisters in Christ have been swept away by the culture and have abandoned the faith completely.
Maybe you know somebody like that.
So it's important for us to be on our guard and watchful.
It means paying attention to what molds and shapes us.
I mean, ask yourself, is it scriptures or is it my screens that are shaping my life?
Is it prayer or is it politics?
Is it our comfort or is it
our relationship with Jesus Christ.
Next in this series of commands that Paul gives us, he says, stand firm in the faith.
And standing firm means holding fast to the truth of the gospel.
When I'm teaching farmers in Africa, we encourage them to stake their claim, much like they would stake out a field.
Farmers go around and they put stakes on the corners of the field to mark their property boundaries, to say, in that moment, this is my field.
It's not my neighbors, it's not anyone else's, this is my field.
And in a similar way, we encourage these farmers to stake out their lives for Jesus, to say, my life belongs to him and no one else.
So another farmer's are making fun of you or your family or your rejection because you've left your Islamic faith, it's time to stake your claim in him.
And that's what it means to stand firm and the faith.
But standing firm in our culture, man, that's tough.
and even say no to our own desires is not easy.
C.S.
Lewis says, we are not necessarily doubting that God will do the best for us.
We are wondering how painful the best will turn out to be.
And sometimes, telling you, standing firm in our faith means trusting God even when His best will be hard.
It means being obedient even when it comes at a cost.
Next to this series,
says be courageous.
And I don't know which version of the Bible you're using, but some versions say act like men, okay?
Courage, as Paul refers to here in this verse, is not about self-confidence or relying on her own strength.
It's true courage is confidence in Christ and his work on the cross, knowing that the one who defeated sin and death is with us.
And then he says in this series, be strong.
Paul's command to be strong again is not mustering up our own strength.
Paul is saying be strengthened, not make yourself strong.
It's like he says in Ephesians chapter six verse 10, finally be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power.
In other words, his strength is fountain in the Lord and in his mighty power, not in our own strength.
Strength doesn't come from trying harder or digging deeper.
It comes from the spirit of God working
in us.
And then finally he says, do everything in love.
Paul wraps up the letter with the key principle for living as a faithful follower of Jesus.
And that is love.
And it really echoes what he said in 1 Corinthians chapter 13, the famous love chapter.
Now he doesn't mean just having nice, warm, fuzzy feelings for someone.
Maybe like Scotland is having for Cindy today as they celebrate their anniversary.
Where is Scott?
Is he here?
There he is.
All right.
That's not what he's talking about, Scott.
He means every action, every word, every part of life should be shaped by God's love.
A love that is selfless and sacrificial, a love that is patient, kind, seeking the ultimate good of others.
A love that mirrors God's love for humanity as we talked about in 1 Corinthians chapter 13.
A love that focuses on serving others, forgiving others.
A love that is based on truth rather than on feelings.
Paul says here, do everything in love.
He's also including all the problems that the Corinthians were dealing with.
They're quarrels on divisions in chapters one through three.
They're bad attitudes towards Paul in chapter four and nine.
The lawsuits between the believers in chapter six.
The struggles in marriage and singleness in chapter seven
the abuse of the weak in chapters eight through 10, the mistreatment of the have-nots at the Lord's Supper and the failure to build up the church through spiritual gifts in chapters 12 through 14.
Paul's basically saying, hey, Corinthians, if love were guiding all of your actions, then these problems would not have existed.
And I believe for us, this is our path forward into 2026.
First, to truly grasp
how deeply God loves us, and then let that love flow out of us into those around us, both in word and deed, do everything in love.
In a world full division in politics and even our own families and those closest to us, our first response should be patience, listening, and reconciliation, not trying to win the argument.
When standing up for a truth in our society, it should never be about pride or personal victory, but about caring for the needs of others and honoring God.
And just because we have certain freedoms as America, this doesn't give us a license or a right to just blast everybody on our Facebook page.
But rather, there are opportunities to serve, build up, encourage, and bless others.
Do everything in love.
So Paul finishes the chapter off with some final greeting, starting in verse 21 here.
Does I Paul write this greeting in my own hand?
If anyone does not love the Lord, let that person be cursed.
Come Lord, the grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
My love to all of you in Christ Jesus, amen.
It's interesting.
Even after all the correcting and disciplining that Paul does in this letter, he closes it as he began with grace.
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
And at the end of the day, the gospel comes down to just that, right?
Grace.
God's undeserved gift for us in Christ Jesus.
And then Paul finishes the letter by adding, my love to all of you in Christ Jesus, amen.
That statement is pretty incredible if you stop and think about it.
I mean, the Corinthians were not easy people to love.
They were difficult to shepherd.
They didn't listen to what Paul told them to do.
They were messy.
They were divided.
They were prideful and immature, and yet Paul ends with love.
How crazy is that?
But he's able to love because this love comes from God.
And as we step into 2026, again, my hope and challenge for you again is this, to truly grasp how deeply God
loves us and then let that love flow out of us into those around us and both word and D do everything in love.
Now, I'm not sure all of us have truly grasped how much God loves us or maybe we've forgotten or maybe we simply take it for granted.
But sometime this week, just stop, slow down, consider ponder
How deeply God loves you, reflecting on all that he has done for you.
It's not something to just understand, but it's also something to live out.
Love is choosing to give thoughtfully and faithfully like we talked about this morning, not just with what's left over, but to give intentionally and to help someone in need.
Love is seeing your gift as an active worship to God.
Love is giving of your time.
It's being flexible and available for God to redirect your path.
For some of you, it means taking time to be present in your children's lives or listening to them, or it may mean volunteering when you know you don't have the time to do it.
Love is living courageously and standing firm in your faith.
It's putting God first, choosing to love Him above all else.
It's having the courage to share the good news with your coworkers.
It's saying no to the cultural pressures around you.
stand in opposition to Godly values.
Love is choosing obedience even when it is costly because you know that God is with you.
So do everything in love.
And really, is there not a better example of this than God himself?
And Christmas reminds us of that love.
How God loved the world.
It's Corbin Porter pointed out this morning.
How God loved the world so much that he gave his one and only son, whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.
And each week we celebrate this love by taking the bread and the cup to remember that Christ came into the world as a humble baby, as a human being, that his love was fully displayed to us
through his life and death on the cross.
And that today we live in a hope because of the resurrection, knowing that Jesus will indeed come again.
So let's remember him now with thankful hearts, grateful of the grace and love that he has given to us.
And at this time, I'm just gonna give you a moment to kind of meditate and to chew on how deeply God loves us.
Think about the sacrifice he made by giving up the glories of heaven to come down to this earth.
and dying for us on a cross.
For you, just think about that.
And then after a moment, we'll take the bread and the cup together.
Alright, at this time, let's take this bread remembering his body which was given for us.
And likewise, let's take the cup to remember his blood that was poured out for us.
Let's pray.
Father, thankful for what you have done for us on the cross, God, we come before you right now asking that you would help us to grasp how wide, how long, how high, how deep is your love.
She pointed out in Ephesians.
God help us to do everything in love, reflecting your love.
Thank you for your forgiveness.
God, we celebrate you what you've done for us today.
Jesus name, amen.